This directory contains a Device Independent Troff previewer for a
Sun workstation.  It is based on a previewer originally written by
David Slattengren (Berkeley) and Rich Hyde (Purdue) and was nearly
all rewritten by Malcolm Slaney (Schlumberger Palo Alto Research).
(An X Windows interface for X Version 11 also exists - see README.X11)

First the appropiate legal mumblings......

This command was developed as an independent project to satisfy a need
of the author.  This program may contain bugs and the user is cautioned
to independently verify that the program is suitable for the user's 
intended purpose. The program is made available on an ``as is'' basis 
with all faults and without any implied or expressed warranties or support
from either the author, Malcolm Slaney, or the Schlumberger Palo Alto
Research Laboratory.

I am putting this program in the Unix domain.  You are free to use
it as you wish.  In return I ask two things.  First, that you do not
remove the names of the authors from this work.  Secondly, if you 
make changes or improvements to this program that you pass these
changes back to the author so that everybody can benefit from the
improvements.


					Malcolm Slaney  (December 1986)
					Schlumberger Palo Alto Research
					3340 Hillview Avenue
					Palo Alto, CA 94304
					(415) 496-4669
					spar!malcolm@decwrl.dec.com
					malcolm@ecn.purdue.edu
					malcolm@spar.slb.com (Someday)



HOW IT WORKS

Ditroff (Device Independent Troff) outputs a file containing commands
for a pseudo typesetter.  SunTroff reads this file and displays an
approximation to the typeset output as a window on a Sun workstation.
The current code makes extensive use of Sun View and will runs under
either Sun Unix 3.0 or 3.2.  It has not been tested with other versions
of Sun software. 

Note that ditroff is NOT the same as /usr/bin/troff in SunOS or
numerous other variants of Unix. Ditroff is supplied with the
Documenters WorkBench by AT&T, or with Research Unix from Bell Labs
from Eighth Edition onwards. To tell if your typesetter if ditroff, try
running the suntroff.man file through it - if you get something
resembling suntroff.tr (i.e ASCII commands) then it's ditroff - if you
get a binary file, or the dreaded 'Typesetter busy', then you've got
the venerable old troff that produces stuff for a CAT typesetter. If
you have the old troff, and do not want to, or cannot purchase DWB from
AT&T or your computer vendor, you may be interested in looking at a
package called psroff that was posted to the comp.sources.unix USENET
newsgroup in Volume 20, Issue 33, sometime in 1989. You can get this
by anonymous ftp, uucp, or tape from any site that archives that
newsgroup -- uunet, osu-cis, for example. See the comp.sources.unix
information posting for more details. It is supposed to convert 
old troff output to ditroff output, among other things.

Ditroff reads files containing typesetter information from a directory
(at SPAR it is in /usr/spar/font/ditroff).  This information is also
used by SunTroff (and most of the filters that convert ditroff output
into bits for a typesetter.)  Within the ditroff directory there
are sub directories for each of the typesetters supported by ditroff.
These directories are named /usr/spar/font/ditroff/devXXX where XXX is
replaced with the typesetter name.
(At CSRI, University of Toronto, the troff directory is called
 /local/share/troff, and ditroff is called /local/bin/troff)

In addition their is another directory (called /usr/spar/font/suntroff
at SPAR) with the actual fonts used by Suntroff.  This directory 
parallel's the ditroff directory with seperate directories for
each typesetter.  These directories contain the reduced fonts used
to approximate each typesetter.  Suntroff (as it is used at SPAR)
uses fonts that have 120 dots per inch.
(At CSRI, this directory is /local/lib/suntroff)

There is software provided (originally written at Berkeley) that will
convert Berkeley versatec format or Imagen RST format fonts to a
readable format, reduce them by any desired fraction and then convert
them back to Versatec format for use by Suntroff.  SunTroff can only
read font information in Berkeley Versatec format (this is also the
default for the rest of the Sun software.)

The hardest problem with SunTroff (possibly unsolved) is the fonts.
The only fonts that are available to Sun users are the versatec fonts
found in /usr/lib/vfont.  Other typesetters (like Imagen) sometimes
provide fonts but not in a common format.  Finally there are typesetters
(like Adobe and Apple) where there it is not possible to get the font
bits.

SunTroff will try to use the fonts available for each typesetter.  Here
at SPAR this means that our 300 dpi Imagen printer has some of the
fonts it needs.  All other devices default to the Versatec fonts. SunTroff
is pretty smart about picking the right size if exactly the right size
isn't available.  If the correct font name isn't present (like a
Roman Helvetica, HR) then it defaults to the Roman font.

In addition to the normal typesetters it is also necessary to define
a new typesetter called sun that represents the default typesetter.
In the ditroff font directory this can be a link to the Versatec information
(link devvp to devsun) but in the SunTroff directory it contains the 
actual bits for the default fonts.  Here is what these two directories
contain at SPAR.

/usr/spar/font/ditroff:
total 25
   1 drwxrwxr-x  9 malcolm       512 Oct 29 12:17 .
   1 drwxrwxr-x  6 root          512 Sep 14 13:21 ..
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm        12 Oct 22 15:58 devi24 -> devimagen300
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm        12 Oct 22 15:58 devimagen -> devimagen300
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm        12 Oct 22 15:58 devimagen24 -> devimagen300
   1 drwxrwxr-x  3 malcolm      1024 Sep 29 11:51 devimagen300
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm        12 Oct 22 15:58 devip -> devimagen300
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         6 Oct 22 15:58 devlw1 -> devpsc
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         6 Oct 22 15:58 devlw2 -> devpsc
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         6 Oct 22 15:58 devlw3 -> devpsc
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         6 Oct 22 15:58 devlw4 -> devpsc
   2 drwxrwxr-x  2 malcolm      1536 Jul  7 20:12 devpsc
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         5 Oct 29 12:17 devsun -> devva
   1 drwxrwxr-x  2 malcolm       512 Jun 30 10:44 devter
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         6 Oct 22 15:58 devterm -> devter
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         6 Oct 22 15:58 devterminal -> devter
   2 drwxrwxr-x  2 malcolm      2048 Jun 30 10:45 devva
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         5 Oct 22 15:58 devvarian -> devva
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         5 Oct 22 15:58 devversatec -> devva
   1 lrwxrwxrwx  1 malcolm         5 Oct 22 15:58 devvp -> devva

/usr/spar/font/suntroff:
total 6
   1 drwxr-xr-x  4 malcolm       512 Sep 14 13:53 .
   1 drwxrwxr-x  6 root          512 Sep 14 13:21 ..
   3 drwxr-xr-x  2 malcolm      3072 Sep 26 17:06 devimagen
   1 drwxr-xr-x  2 malcolm      1024 Sep 15 09:38 devsun

Note that in the /usr/spar/font/ditroff directory there are really
only five different devices supported (300 dpi Imagen, 300 dpi
Postscript, dumb terminals and the 200 dpi Versatec type 
devices).  Each directory contains the DESC and font files needed
for ditroff.

The /usr/spar/font/suntroff directory only contains two directories,
one for the imagen fonts and the other for the default sun fonts.  The
programs in the fontstuff subdirectory are used to make these fonts.
If anybody figures out a way to get the Apple fonts I would dearly
love to hear from them.

INSTALLATION
Installation of SunTroff is relatively easy.  The following represents
a short do list (I hope I haven't forgotten anything).  Except for
creating the BITDIR (see 2 below) directory and installing the binary
image of suntroff there is no need for special permissions.

1)	Edit the Makefile.  Change the definitions of VFONTS and RSTFONTS
	to point to the location of your Versatec Font Files (as provided
	by Sun) and the RST (Imagen) fonts.  If you don't have an Imagen
	printer (or you don't want to mess with the Imagen fonts) then
	don't worry about the RSTFONTS.  These two definitions are needed
	by the programs that attempt to automatically make the font files
	needed for the screen. Change SUNTROFF_FONTS to the directory 
	where you want the scaled sunfonts to go (they'll be put in devXXX
	subdirectories, and set DEVICE to whatever XXX is to be. (eg) sun
	for devsun, or imp for devimp.) Change MAKEDEV to point to 
	either makedev (for AT&T ditroff people) or devconfig (for Berkeley
	ditroff people). Change WIDTHDIR to point to wherever ditroff
	looks for its font width tables. To find that out, type
	something like
		ditroff -t -Tfoo suntroff.man > /dev/null
	You should get an error message like

	ditroff: can't open tables for /usr/local/lib/troff//devfoo/DESC.out

	Whatever is before the devfoo is WIDTHDIR.
	(At CSRI, we call ditroff troff, and just bury the Sun
	supplied /usr/bin/troff)

	People using Berkeley ditroff should add -DBEZERKELYISM to the
	DEFINES line in the Makefile.

2)	Make sure that the dev.h file is correct.  There are two versions.
	The one supplied is identical to AT&T's version and should work
	for most people.  If your version of DESC.out files are compiled
	with another version of dev.h then you should replace this copy
	of the dev.h file with your own.  It doesn't really matter which
	version you use as long as you are consistent.
	
3)	Type make.  This will make the suntroff binary.

4)	Type 'make fonts' which will make the font conversion programs, and
	then scale and make the fonts, and install them in 
	$(SUNTROFF_FONTS)/dev$(DEVICE)

5)	Type 'make width'. This will install the devsun directory in
	WIDTHDIR.  It runs either makedev (for you AT&T ditroff people) or
	devconfig (for you Berkeley ditroff people).  

	The devsun directory (and more specifically the DESC.out file that
	devconfig/makedev create) is necessary so that SunTroff knows how
	to find the special characters (like ligatures) in the font files.

	In the directory devsun I have supplied the DESC and font
	description files we use for the Versatec (default) fonts.  If
	your site doesn't already support the Versatec fonts then these
	description files might be a good place to start.  Be sure to
	put them in with the rest of your fonts and run either makedev
	(AT&T) or devconfig (Berkeley).  You need to have a devsun
	directory......it can either be a link to the devversatec
	(or whatever you call it) or a copy of the devsun directory
	supplied here.

6)	To test.  Type the command "suntroff suntroff.tr" while
	running in suntools.  Things should be pretty obvious from the
	right mouse button menu, the middle mouse button and the
	status panel.  (The files suntroff.tr and xtroff.tr are both
	ditroff output files for test purposes. They are the suntroff
	and xtroff manuals respectively). Then you can create a ditroff
	output file with the -t flag to ditroff. 

One final note (or things not to get bitten by)
Note there are two different versions of the dev.h file that describes
the DESC.out files.  The AT&T version is probably the most widespread
and is what is distributed in this directory.  Berkeley made a couple
of small changes in the size of some of the string arrays and changed
a couple of the spare slots into graphics specifications.  It doesn't
matter which one you use as long as it is the same as the one used
to make your DESC.out files.  (If you're not sure then the one supplied
is probably correct for you.)

If you don't have the proper $(WIDTHDIR)/devsun/DESC.out file installed then
SunTroff will not be able to find the special characters like ligatures
(fi, ffi, etc).

The files found in this directory are listed below.  Note the source files
are organized the way they are because there is somebody at SPAR who is 
interested in using the SunTroff user interface (in sunwindows.c) as part
of a TeX previewer.  The file sunwindows.c contains all the SunView code,
and suntroff.c and *.c contain all the ditroff dependent stuff.

	README			This file.

	dev.h			Contains structure describing the
				binary file with typesetter information.

	devsun/ 		A directory containing the DESC and
				font description files needed for DiTroff.
				Be sure to install this information in
				your ditroff font directory.  SunTroff needs
				this information so it can figure out the
				mapping of the special characters. 
				If you already have Ditroff working on
				the versatec then just use that directory.

	suntroff		The binary executable.  Install in
				your favorite source directory.

	suntroff.h		Various system defines.  You will
				definitely have to change the location
				of your font directories (FONTDIR and
				BITDIR).  The rest of the stuff is
				probably OK.  Also note the LPR command
				that is used.  It could be different
				at different sites.

	suntroff.man		The manual page
	suntroff.tr		The ditroff output of the manual page

	suntroff.c		Miscellaneous functions that don't
				really fit anywhere else.  The functions
				in sunwindows.c mostly call the functions
				in this file.

	curves.c		The fancy drawing commands.  There were
				not written at SPAR.

	draw.c		The simple drawing commands.  Most of
				the word is done by SunView.

	fixpoint.c	Fixed point arithmetic used by the 
				routines in curves.c

	font.c		All the routines needed to deal with
				the fonts.  This includes font loading
				and caching.

	parse.c		Parse the troff input file.  No real
				work is done by this file.  It depends
				on the other files to draw the
				characters.

	sunwindows.c		This file contains all the SunView interface.
				This includes the page movement, the
				panel and the menu.  It provides a large
				bit map for the troff drawing functions
				to scribble on then displays the desired
				part of the page for the user.


In the fontstuff directory:

	MakeSunFonts		Program to make the reduced fonts
				needed by SunTroff.  By default it
				reads the fonts in /usr/lib/vfont
				reduces them and puts them in
				the proper directory.

	MakeImagenFonts		Program to make the reduced fonts
				needed by SunTroff to emulate the
				300 DPI Imagen printers.

	ch2rst
	ch2rst.c		Convert a font in character format
				back into RST (Imagen) format
	ch2cft
	ch2vft.c		Convert a font in character format
				back into Versatec format

	rst.h			Describes the RST (Imagen) format.

	rst2ch
	rst2ch.c		Convert an RST format font into 
				a readable (character) format.

	scalech
	scalech.c		Scale a readable font (as created
				by rst2ch and vft2ch) by a fraction
				less than 1.

	vf2bdf
	vf2bdf.c		Convert a Vfont (Versatec format)
				font into the BDF format used by
				X11. (Originally from Ken Yap, at Rochester,
				a couple of fixes by Dana Chee at bellcore
				- moraes)

	vft2ch
	vft2ch.c		Convert a Vfont (Versatec format)
				font into character format.

In the bitmaps directory:

	ditroff.icon		An icon for the SunTroff program.

	ditroff.bitmap		An icon for the X11 program.

	hand.x11.mask
	hand.x11.bitmap		The hand cursor for the X11 program. 
				(All conversions from Sun format to X11
				format were made using Jef Poskanzer's
				pbm programs - moraes)

Please contact me if you have any questions, comments, bugs and (most
importantly) any improvements.

					Malcolm Slaney
					Schlumberger Palo Alto Research
					3340 Hillview Avenue
					Palo Alto, CA 94304
					(415) 496-4669
					{decwrl,pur-ee}!malcolm
					spar!malcolm@decwrl.dec.com
					malcolm@malcolm.purdue.edu

