To install, 

1. Edit the Imakefile to change XWSRC, DOCDIR, CC, DUMPDIR, DEFINES,
CDEBUGFLAGS, INCLUDES, XWLIB, MALLOC, USLEEP to your taste. There are brief
comments about each in the Imakefile.

3. Edit windows.h if need be, changing DEFAULTSPACING, DEFAULTPAGEHEIGHT,
and DEFAULTPAGEWIDTH. These are set to fill the entire screen on a Sun 3/50
ordinary resolution or uvax3200.

4. make.

5. To test it, copy the file fontdesc/xpic to ~/.xpic, run it with the
command 
	xpic test/test.xpic 
xpic uses the X.V11R3 font naming convention and the X.V11R3 fonts.

6. make install.

Notes:  You need to have the HP Widgets. The ones on the R3 tape in
contrib/widgets are really for R2 and won't work with xpic. You need to get
Martin Friedmann's fixed widgets. (These are available as
Xhp.patch.works.tar.Z from various archive sites - try expo.lcs.mit.edu in
contrib/ and ai.toronto.edu in pub/X by anonymous ftp)

xpic has been tested very extensively under X11R2 and R3 on monochrome
and color Suns and reasonably thoroughly under X11R2 on uVaxen as well.
It has been known to compile and work on SGI's Personal Iris.

Bugs
====
Known problems:
	Splines leave a residue caused by a lousy rubber banding
	method. If you think you can do better, please do.

	Strange things happen on undo of block operations if you
	happen to have selected elements that were created by the
	operation you want to undo. This is a result of the undo
	philosophy, and seems hard to fix - if you want to undo
	something, undo it immediately after doing it!

	Rubberbanding thick objects is SLOOOOW, especially on machines
	without hardware floating point support. Yell at your server vendor.

If you do run into a bug, please tell me exactly what happened so I can try
to track it down - ideally, if you could narrow it down to a reproducible
set of actions, "when I edit this file, draw a spline, undo that, draw a
line, and then click the adjust buttons, the line vanishes" would make it
possible to fix the bug without divination!

Please do send in bug reports - chances are that I'll be able to find the
bug a bit faster, unless it depends on specific peculiarities of your system
- and then I might be able to offer pointers and narrow down the
possibilities.  With a bug report, please send me the output of an 'xrdb
-query'.

Finally the disclaimer:
This program was developed as an independent project to satisfy a need
of the author.  This program may contain bugs and the user is cautioned
to independently verify that the program is suitable for the user's 
intended purpose. The program is made available on an ``as is'' basis 
with all faults and without any implied or expressed warranties or support
from either the author, Mark Moraes, or the University of Toronto.

You are free to use xpic as you wish. You may redistribute the program
freely, with the source. In return I ask two things.  First, that you
do not remove the name of the author from this work.  Secondly, if
you make changes or improvements to this program that you pass these
changes back to the author so that everybody can benefit from the
improvements.


		Mark Moraes.
		Computer Systems Research Institute, 
		Univerity of Toronto.
		moraes@csri.toronto.{edu,cdn}
		moraes@csri.utoronto.ca
		moraes@utcsri.uucp
		{your favourite backbone}!uunet!utcsri!moraes
