This is Version 1.4 of the Xcu Widget Set.
See Readme/changes* for the differences between this and other versions.
The Xcu Widget Set is based on the R3 intrinsics.

This distribution should make easily within the X source tree.
For those of you without that luxury, you probably are familiar
with the difficulties involved.  I'm not :-)

To Make:
   1) need to make a top level Makefile from the Imakefile.
   2) make Makefiles
   3) make 

(There will be a couple "Usage" messages toward the end of the make.
 This is because the makefiles are set up to make the modules only
 by explicitly making the individual targets.  O.w., the example clients
 could take up a lot of disk space.  Just make those targets when you
 are ready to look at them.)

To help struggling beginners,
for what it's worth, I would do it this way:

    Untar the distribution into the directory $(TOP)/lib/Xcu.

    Then to make the Makefile from Imakefile, use the command:
	../../util/imake/imake -DTOPDIR=../.. \
	-T ../../util/imake.includes/Imake.tmpl -s Makefile

After making, see the README's in examples/* to run the test programs.

There are seven subdirectories in this directory: man, src, bin, doc,
examples, wlmCompiler, and Geometry.

    Subdirectory "examples" contains test program subdirectories.

    Subdirectory "src" contains widgets, resource converters,
    and utility routines.

    Subdirectory "man" contains manuals in both troff and postcript formats.

    Subdirectory "doc" contains a tutorial and a "hello, world" example
    for the Wlm Widget Layout Manager widget.

    Subdirectory "wlmCompiler" contains the Widget Layout Description Language
    Compiler required for using the Wlm widget.

    Subdirectory "bin" contains some executable scripts useful for Makefiles
    that use the Wlm widget.

    Subdirectory "Geometry" contains a bug fix for the intrinsics routine,
    XtMakeGeometryRequest().  The xtbl demonstrations will not work
    properly without patching this bug.  There may have been an official
    R3 patch for this, and I assume that R4 will certainly have it fixed.


