
Notes on Xapollo for MIT X.V11R4
--------------------------------

CHANGES SINCE R3:

    --  The driver has, perforce, been rewritten to properly use the R4 data
        structures and interfaces.  Internally, the driver has been restructured
        as a result.  For example, the driver now uses a completely different GC
        validation strategy that allows many GC's to remain validated at any
        time, rather than only one at a time.

    --  The driver uses the new mi software cursor support.  As a result, the
        PseudoColor servers (on 4-bit and 8-bit displays) now claim to have 16
        and 256 color table entries respectively, not 14 and 254 as before.

    --  The broken backing-store support in color has been fixed.

    --  The new Shape extension is incorporated.

    --  The switcher has been removed.  Recent releases of Domain/OS broke the
        old switcher, and even if fixed, the switcher would be likely to break
        again since it relied on unsupported interfaces that continue to change
        from release to release of Domain/OS.  Also, those who used the switcher
        on color displays know it was never very robust to begin with.  Finally,
        the existence of the Domain/X11 product removes a lot of the reason for
        wanting the switcher.

    --  The default driver for monochrome screens has changed.  Xapollo used to
        support only mfb on monochrome displays, and supported either mfb or the
        GPR driver (known as "apc") on color displays.  Xapollo now uses the GPR
        driver by default on both display types, but can optionally use the mfb
        driver on either type.  See the Xapollo man page for the -D option
        syntax, which has been changed.

    --  Many bug fixes and graphics optimizations have been made to the GPR
        driver.

    --  Full up/down keyboard support has been supplied, to eliminate the
        hackery of the black "mouse modifier keys".  This full support will only
        work on SR10.2 or later; SR10.1 will continue to work the old way.
        NOTE:  this support includes full autorepeat support, including control
        of the autorepeat state of individual keys.


NOTES ON BUILDING X11 SOFTWARE:

    --  Please note that the X software must be built in a "bsd4.3" environment.
