                  Extended Portable Bitmap Toolkit
                      Distribution of 22nov89
                   Previous distribution 13sep89


Included are a number of programs for converting various image formats
to and from portable formats; plus some tools for manipulating the
portable formats.  The package is broken up into four parts (five parts
if you count this one, the zeroth part).  First is PBM, for bitmaps (1
bit per pixel).  Then there is PGM, for grayscale images.  Next is PPM,
for full-color images.  Last, there is PNM, which does content-independent
manipulations on any of the three formats.

These parts are semi-independent; if you're only going to deal with
bitmaps, you don't have to install PGM and PPM, and this makes PNM run
faster; if you want PGM, you must install PBM but can leave PPM out;
but if you want PPM, you must install both PGM and PBM.  PNM is
optional but recommended.


To install:

    Unpack the files.
    Decide whether you want to use Imakefiles or Makefiles.  If you want
      to use Makefiles:

	Edit the top-level Makefile, find each line with the string
	  "CONFIGURE", and follow the directions for setting configuration
	  options.
	Likewise edit pbmplus.h.
	Likewise edit pnm/Makefile.
	Make.
	When you're happy that things work ok, make install.
    
    If you want to use Imakefiles instead:

	Edit the top-level Imakefile, find each line with the string
	  "CONFIGURE", and follow the directions for setting configuration
	  options.
	Likewise edit pbmplus.h.
	Likewise edit pnm/Imakefile.
	Edit Makefile and */Makefile, look towards the end for the
	  definition of TOP, and change it to point to your X11 tree.
	Save the original Makefiles, in case you later want to switch back
	  to using them.
	Touch Imakefile, since you just editted Makefile.
	Make Makefile, make Makefiles, make depend, then make.
	When you're happy that things work ok, make install.


I've tested this stuff under 4.2 BSD, 4.3 BSD, on Sun 3's 4's and 386's
and Sequents and Vaxen, with cc and gcc.  Nevertheless, I'm sure bugs
remain.  Feedback is welcome; send bug reports, enhancements, checks,
money orders, etc. to the addresses below.  Be sure to mention what
version you have when sending bug reports!

    Jef Poskanzer
    jef@well.sf.ca.us
    {ucbvax, lll-crg, sun!pacbell, apple, hplabs}!well!jef


Files in pbmplus.shar:

    README		this
    CHANGES		list of changes between the various versions of PBM
    FORMATS		list of the formats supported
    OTHER.SYSTEMS	list of other free image-processing software
    TIPS		useful techniques and rules of thumb for PBM
    Makefile		guess
    Imakefile		for X11-type installations
    pbmplus.h		header file for PBM, PGM, PPM, and PNM

    compataliases	csh script for compatibility with old versions


Files in pbm.shar?:

    Makefile		guess
    Imakefile		for X11-type installations

    brushtopbm.c	convert Xerox doodle brushes to portable bitmap
    cmuwmtopbm.c	convert CMU window manager format to portable bitmap
    g3topbm.c		convert Group 3 FAX to portable bitmap
    icontopbm.c		convert Sun icon to portable bitmap
    gemtopbm.c		convert GEM .img format to portable bitmap
    macptopbm.c		convert MacPaint to portable bitmap
    mgrtopbm.c		convert MGR format to portable bitmap
    pcxtopbm.c		convert PC paintbrush format to portable bitmap
    picttopbm.c		convert PICT to portable bitmap
    rasttopbm.c		convert Sun raster to portable bitmap
    xbmtopbm.c		convert X10 or X11 bitmap to portable bitmap
    xwdtopbm.c		convert X10 or X11 window dump to portable bitmap

    pbmtoascii.c	convert portable bitmap to ASCII graphic form
    pbmtobbnbg.c	convert portable bitmap to BBN BitGraph graphics
    pbmtocmuwm.c	convert portable bitmap to CMU window manager format
    pbmtog3.c		convert portable bitmap to Group 3 FAX
    pbmtogo.c		convert portable bitmap to GraphOn graphics
    pbmtoicon.c		convert portable bitmap to Sun icon
    pbmtolj.c		convert portable bitmap to HP LaserJet
    pbmtomacp.c		convert portable bitmap to MacPaint
    pbmtomgr.c		convert portable bitmap to MGR format
    pbmtoptx.c		convert portable bitmap to Printronix
    pbmtorast.c		convert portable bitmap to Sun raster
    pbmtoxbm.c		convert portable bitmap to X11 bitmap
    pbmtox10bm.c	convert portable bitmap to X10 bitmap
    pbmtoxwd.c		convert portable bitmap to X11 window dump

    pbmlife.c		apply Conway's rules of Life to a portable bitmap
    pbmmake.c		create a blank bitmap of a specified size
    pbmmask.c		create a mask bitmap from a regular bitmap
    pbmpaste.c		paste a rectangle into a portable bitmap
    pbmreduce.c		reduce a portable bitmap N times, using Floyd-Steinberg
    pbmupc.c		create a Universal Product Code bitmap

    libpbm[1-5].c	a few utility routines
    pbm.h		header file for libpbm
    libpbm.h		internal header file for libpbm
    g3.h		definitions for Group 3 FAX
    macp.h		definitions for MacPaint files
    pict.h		definitions for PICT files
    rast.h		definitions for Sun raster files
    x10wd.h		definitions for X10 window dumps
    x11wd.h		definitions for X11 window dumps
    bitreverse.h	useful include file
    *.1			manual entries for all of the tools
    pbm.5		manual entry for the pbm format
    libpbm.3		manual entry for the pbm library


Files in pgm.shar?:

    Makefile		guess
    Imakefile		for X11-type installations

    fitstopgm.c		convert FITS format to portable graymap
    fstopgm.c		convert Usenix FaceSaver file to portable graymap
    hipstopgm.c		convert HIPS format to portable graymap
    psidtopgm.c		convert PostScript "image" data to portable graymap
    rawtopgm.c		convert raw grayscale bytes to portable graymap
    tifftopgm.c		convert TIFF format to portable graymap

    pgmtofits.c		convert portable graymap to FITS format
    pgmtopbm.c		convert portable graymap to portable bitmap
    pgmtops.c		convert portable graymap to Encapsulated PostScript

    pgmenhance.c	edge-enhance a portable graymap
    pgmhist.c		print a histogram of the values in a portable graymap
    pgmnorm.c		normalize contrast in a portable graymap

    libpgm[1-3].c	a few utility routines
    pgm.h		header file for libpgm
    libpgm.h		internal header file for libpgm
    dithers.h		useful include file
    tiff.h		definitions for TIFF files
    *.1			manual entries for all of the tools
    pgm.5		manual entry for the pgm format
    libpgm.3		manual entry for the pgm library


Files in ppm.shar?:

    Makefile		guess
    Imakefile		for X11-type installations

    giftoppm.c		convert GIF to portable pixmap
    ilbmtoppm.c		convert Amiga IFF ILBM to portable pixmap
    imgtoppm.c		convert Img-whatnot to portable pixmap
    mtvtoppm.c		convert MTV ray-tracer output to portable pixmap
    qrttoppm.c		convert QRT ray-tracer output to portable pixmap
    rasttoppm.c		convert Sun raster file to portable pixmap
    tgatoppm.c		convert TrueVision Targa file to portable pixmap
    xwdtoppm.c		convert color X10 or X11 window dump to portable pixmap

    ppmtogif.c		convert portable pixmap to GIF
    ppmtoilbm.c		convert portable pixmap to Amiga IFF ILBM
    ppmtopgm.c		convert portable pixmap to portable graymap
    ppmtops.c		convert portable pixmap to color Encapsulated PostScript
    ppmtorast.c		convert portable pixmap to Sun raster file
    ppmtoxwd.c		convert portable pixmap to color X11 window dump

    ppmarith.c		perform arithmetic on two portable pixmaps
    ppmconvol.c		general MxN convolution on a portable pixmap
    ppmcscale.c		scale the colors in a portable pixmap
    ppmpat.c		create a pretty pixmap
    ppmquant.c		quantize colors down to a specified number
    ppmrotate.c		rotate a portable pixmap
    ppmscale.c		scale a portable pixmap
    ppmshear.c		shear a portable pixmap
    ppmhist.c		print a histogram of a portable pixmap

    convolscripts/*	ppmconvol scripts

    libppm[1-5].c	a few utility routines
    ppm.h		header file for libppm
    ppmcmap.h		header file for colormap routines in libppm
    ppmdraw.h		header file for simple drawing routines in libppm
    libppm.h		internal header file for libppm
    tga.h		definitions for TrueVision Targa files
    *.1			manual entries for all of the tools
    ppm.5		manual entry for the ppm format
    libppm.3		manual entry for the ppm library


Files in pnm.shar?:

    Makefile		guess
    Imakefile		for X11-type installations

    pnmcat.c		concatenate portable anymaps
    pnmcrop.c		crop all like-colored borders off a portable anymap
    pnmcut.c		select a rectangular region from a portable anymap
    pnmenlarge.c	enlarge a portable anymap N times
    pnmflip.c		perform one or more flip operations on a portable anymap
    pnminvert.c		invert a portable anymap
    pnmpaste.c		paste a rectangle into a portable anymap
    pnmtile.c		replicate a portable anymap into a specified size

    libpnm[1-4].c	a few utility routines
    pnm.h		header file for libpnm
    *.1			manual entries for all of the tools
    pnm.5		manual entry for the pnm format
    libpnm.3		manual entry for the pnm library
