				  Tekwm
		       The Tektronix Window Manager
			  Public Domain Release
			      Glenn Widener
			     Tektronix, Inc.
			    November 22, 1989

Tekwm is the current supported Tektronix window manager.  It is based on
the Ardent Window Manager, awm, which is in turn based on the Ultrix
Window Manager, uwm.  Tekwm has been extensively bugfixed, and fully
complies with the ICCCM (with minor exceptions, see the ICCCM compliance
notes in the file COMPLIANCE).

There are still many minor bugs, and even more features I would like to
have added, but there are only so many hours in the day for non-nerds.
Known bugs are listed in the file BUGS; please look here before you send
me mail.  Mail about bugs I already know about will be generally ignored.

See the file ENHANCEMENTS for a list of interesting proposed enhancements
that I never had time to do.

For reliability and malleability reasons, I have chosen to revert to the
uwm menu package, instead of the RTL menus used by awm.  Loses a few minor
features, but gains a couple of features, and is much easier to maintain.

Note that the final public release of awm was not incorporated into Tekwm,
due to release timing and the extensive divergence of the code.  There may
be useful fixes and enhancements to be gleaned from awm, but I have not
attempted it.

When you build Tekwm, note the following things:

The RTL "neaten" package, neaten.c, has not been re-integrated since the
awm code was received (and extensive modifications to the tekwm code
made).  Those who wish to try it will have to do some cleanup.

The sources include the Tektronix standard tekwmrc files, with supporting
bitmaps in the bitmaps subdirectory.  The tekwmrc files are
platform-specific, each in their own subdirectory so they can be installed
without changing the file name.  The Imake rule that installs them is a
Tek special, hence it is commented out.

Some of the source files pass lint...  Tekwm compiles and is tested on all
Tek workstations.  An earlier version was ported to several machines at
Purdue.  You should have no build problems, but don't be surprised if you
encounter bugs.

If you have problems, suggestions, enhancements, or questions, contact

Glenn Widener
Tektronix, Inc.
(503) 685-2494
glennw@orca.wv.tek.com

You may or may not get assistance as time permits; I am on to other projects!

Happy hacking!
